Good morning.
The text for our meditation today comes from our epistle lesson in 2 Timothy. Let's begin with a word of prayer.
Dear Father in heaven, we thank you for this time together. We thank you how you call and gather us to this place, receive your gifts. As we receive the gift of your word this time, we ask
We ask that you would bless it, that you would plant it deep within us, that it would guide our thoughts and guide our words and our actions as we go about our everyday lives. In the name of Jesus, we pray. Amen.
Thank you.
Amen.
Please be seated.
Grace, mercy and peace be to you in the name of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.
It's been just a few years since my mother died, and and shortly thereafter, my siblings and I had the responsibility and the opportunity to go through all.
Through all of her possessions.
If you've ever had to do that, you know what it's like.
My mom loved to collect books.
But she loved to write.
Whether it was notes in her Bible or copious writings in a separate notebook, kind of her own commentary,
Um,
On scripture,
And she loved to write as scripture was applied to her life through the years.
Looking at our own Bible with all the markings, with all the highlights,
I would occasionally see my name in the margin.
Which wasn't always a good thing.
But she also liked to write letters.
We found beautiful love letters between her and my stepfather.
Letter she had received from her siblings.
And then all of these
We found a rather large shoebox.
Of all the letters that I had written,
When I was in basic training here at Lackland,
and then shortly thereafter stationed in Korea.
She saved all of them.
Back then, it was a time when letters were the only means really of communicating with your loved ones, especially if you were in a military college or far from home.
it was a time when letter writing
Took the place of texting, phone calls,
The time where if you remember long distance rates were exorbitant.
But there is something about words.
From a loved one, written in their own handwriting,
In that moment.
Thinking about you.
They're unable to cut or delete or paste.
Just their spontaneous and thoughtful words.
Specifically for you.
For me and my mom, who represented my family, it was a conduit.
Of sorts of feelings, information and love.
Specifically for each other and about each other.
My mom kept all of them and
If I had the wisdom that I.
have now, sort of.
I would have kept hers as well.
Knowing what knowing back then what they would mean to me today.
They would have been very special.
So it was easy for me to imagine the connection that Paul had with the recipients of his letters.
And the connection
these recipients had with Paul.
Paul, however,
Provided a conduit delivering the freedom of the gospel.
To his churches, and in this case to Timothy.
Who considered Paul his mentor and partner in the proclamation of the Gospel.
Paul was writing from a Roman prison cell to his dear friend in the faith, Timothy, and and says this.
Consider what I say, for the Lord will give you understanding in everything. Remember Jesus Christ, risen from the dead, the offspring of David.
As preached in my gospel.
For which?
I am suffering. That's why I'm here, bound with chains as a criminal.
But the word of God is not bound.
Therefore, I endure everything for the sake of the elect, and that they also may obtain the salvation that is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.
The saying is trustworthy, for if we have died with him, we will also live with him. if we endure, we will also reign with him. if we deny him, he will also deny us. if we are faithless,
He remains faithful.
For he cannot deny himself.
Paul could have ended this passage with this is the Gospel of the Lord.
What a profound message.
From a man in chains.
In this place,
And in this worship service, we are immersed in the word of God.
And as Christians, and as Lutherans, we cling to the centrality of of the word of God.
As we are ramping up to
The celebration of the Reformation.
Luther himself taught that the word is the vehicle of God's grace.
It's not just information.
But the very means by which,
The holy spirit
Creates and strengthens.
Our faith.
So here we have Paul, who took great pride in his persecution of Christians,
is now shackled in a roman prison for preaching the gospel of jesus christ a crucified and risen savior
In all of that,
Imprisonment in in where he finds himself.
In verse 9, he declares triumphantly, but the word of God is not found.
Paul,
His body frail.
Shackled,
And imprisoned in a
Dank, dark, sell.
May be imprisoned, but.
Yet he declares the gospel of the risen Lord with
Boldness and with confidence.
The Bible gives us many instances of the word.
Punching through circumstance and delivering the grace of the gospel.
in acts twelve twenty four.
This verse comes after the account of the persecution where King Herod killed the Apostle James. he had Peter jailed with the intent to execute him.
and through all of that ordeal in verse twenty-four it simply ends by saying
But the word of God increased and multiplied.
Increased and multiplied.
Through all circumstances.
No tyrant, no prison, no government, no cultural shift, no assassination,
Can hold it back.
The word of god
Increases
It multiplies.
The spark.
of the reformation when Luther nailed his 95 theses.
It caused the word of God to increase and multiply. Okay.
The word now in the language of the people spread like.
Wildfire across Europe,
Despite bans and burning,
God's word grows.
Throwing people to faith in Christ alone.
I actually had to check myself with the title of the sermon. I wasn't quite sure in my head if the word unbound was really a word.
And I looked at the book, I can see if that's really a word. It is a word.
But what makes God's word unbound?
What makes it different from our words?
which can kind of
Why stagnant on a page?
The difference in God's word
Comes to us from one of my favorite passages in all scripture, which is Hebrews, four, twelve.
Because it gives us the answer.
For the word of God is living and active, sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing to the division of the soul and spirit of joints and marrow and discerning.
The thoughts and the intentions of the heart.
Living and active.
Not dead letters on a page, but.
A.
moving, dynamic,
A force from the Holy Spirit. Amen.
As Lutherans, we like to emphasize that this word is.
efficacious it's effective it does what it says it's going to do when it proclaims forgiveness of sins through christ body and blood it does what it says it's going to do it actually forgives
Gives.
When it promises life in the resurrection,
It creates in us faith to believe that.
And this faith isn't something that we muster up.
In confirmation, many of us memorize these words from the Catechism.
I believe that I cannot, by my own reason or strength, believe in Jesus Christ, my Lord, or come to him.
But
The holy spirit has called me to the gospel
That word
The living and active word pierces our hardened hearts.
It exposes our sin,
And yet,
It applies a balm of grace.
And it increases our faith day by day.
Paul knew this personally.
and second timothy he's not.
Complaining or whining about the chains he's in, he's enduring.
For the sake of you and me.
Those whom God calls to the word, to
Salvation in Jesus.
And I like in verses eleven to thirteen, Paul kind of gives us a bit of a ah, creed of faithfulness, and in in a way.
Because he says, and I'm paraphrasing here, he says, die with Christ in baptism,
Live with him eternally.
Endure trials
And to quote the title of the book by President Newman, "Struggle well."
Reign with him in glory.
Even if we falter in faithlessness, he remains faithful.
because
God's promise is, thank goodness,
Are not dependent on our performance.
But on his unchanging nature.
He's God.
Forever.
this is what we believe.
Just appeared justification by grace through faith, not works.
Be unbound, be unfettered. I love that word, assures us that our salvation is secure in Christ, freeing us.
From all fears.
The living word
Living in active work is ours for you, for me.
But how does this word, how how does that?
That unbounded word, increase our faith and give us faith.
even lutherans.
Boldness to share it in our daily lives.
The word first builds our faith.
It's kind of like a muscle being exercised in in the gym.
And as we hear the word in worship, as we read it and meditate it at home, or meditate on that in our devotions, the spirit
It works faith in us.
Constantly,
It's constantly arming us, constantly equipping us.
Constantly giving it, making it the first reaction that we have.
In our daily lives.
Faith comes from hearing.
In times of doubt
Like maybe when a job loss shakes us to our core, our illness is,
Lingering and returning and
or wouldn't win that we have death of someone very near to us.
The word
Reminds us of Jesus risen.
And raining.
Unfettered,
Unbound.
By death itself.
It increases our trust.
Turning these,
Fretting whispers that we have of worry into shouts.
Of confidence.
Like Paul did in the jail cell.
But the word doesn't stop there. it overflows.
Into our boldness to witness
We just talked about it in order to gym.
And as Lutherans, we cherish.
The doctrine of vocation.
God calls us to serve him in ordinary roles, not just
Churchy ones.
Paul endured change so the word could reach.
the people.
We...
Me, you.
And we are sent into our worlds.
To.
Proclaim that word.
in the ways that God has given us.
If you're a teacher,
Maybe that unfettered word gives you courage to speak.
Kindness.
Rooted in that gospel of grace.
Amid a chaotic classroom.
or school bus.
Or a mechanic maybe it emboldens you if you're
Fixing lawn equipment to share a story of God's faithfulness.
While fixing a neighbor's car.
Apparent.
It equips you to teach your kids the word.
At all times of day, especially at bedtime,
trusting
That it will multiply in their hearts. it will increase and multiply, not by our own reason or strength, but how the Holy Spirit works in them.
Dietrich Braunhofer,
Preach the,
Unbound word
Despite threats from the Gestapo.
And Bonhoeffer, who was inspired by
Texts like this, especially, I think, with Paul in in prison.
Wrote ah, ah, wrote from prison about the words power to sustain.
And to send.
And Bonhoeffer didn't cower either. He boldly proclaimed Christ even unto death.
And while we are not facing imprisonment,
We do face.
A sometimes hostile culture.
With secular pressures,
We face.
Sceptical friends and yes, family.
But the same unchanging word,
empowers us.
It's not about being an outgoing evangelist. It's about the word doing the work in you.
Through the gifts and the talents, the personalities that God has given you me,
us.
We share simply.
Confidently knowing.
That the word is unbound,
And it's maybe there to convict.
And by the work of the Holy Spirit, at some point,
Convert
I think, at times,
We...
Myself included.
Leave here after the service.
We do our turkey things for the week we receive the gifts from god and love and mercy receive forgiveness
And then we go to lunch and we kind of forget
About
What we've been given.
But I think it's a time that we need to commit to letting the word of God,
Run free in our lives.
Where we need to read
And meditate on the word.
with our Bibles more at home.
Maybe join a bible study
And always, whatever you do,
We step out in the vocation that we are called to with boldness.
Or we may share a verse with a co-worker. we pray with a friend.
Or maybe pray with someone we don't even know.
And we live out our grace, live out the grace of God in our home.
The word that
Pierced,
The regime of Herod,
after he killed james.
Sustained pollen chains and reforms,
Our hearts,
Will multiply through you.
And the closing poll words for us.
Consider these things.
And this is
The promise the Lord will give you understanding. Amen.
May God's unbounded word increase your faith and ignite your confidence.
In the name of Jesus, we pray.
Amen.
Now, may the peace of God, which is